---
format: post
title: Neural Style
---
This past weekend I spent some time working on a simple project tangentally related to OpenEVA: I have been interested in using convolutional neural networks for [artistic style transfer](https://github.com/jcjohnson/neural-style) for some time and have experimented using my own hardware. However, my personal hardware budget is somewhat limited, my 560ti can just barely run a 512px tranfer using simplified modles if you dont mind the smell of hot silicone.Since then, I have wanted to set up an Amazon Web Services Elastic Compute Cloud (EC2) instance capable of producing artistic style tranfers, which would enable all sorts of interesting things. Over the weekend I set up a simple Docker file and AWS host provisioning script which sets everyting needed to run the artistic style trasfer algorithm in a docker container on the host.

Getting everything set up was suprisingly easy, and the only matierial cost is to pay for server time ( ~$0.90USD/hr in my case ). The first step of course was to do a bit of research. My expirence with docker is fairly limited but I have experimented previously with neural-style at home. It quickly became obvious that I would be using [nvidia-docker](https://github.com/NVIDIA/nvidia-docker) to run dockerized neural-style containers, which could then be run on an AWS EC2 instance. I found [albajari/neural-style-docker](https://github.com/albarji/neural-style-docker) which was almost exactly what I needed and served as a great reference for writing my dockerfile. For the AWS side the [nvidia-docker wiki](https://github.com/NVIDIA/nvidia-docker/wiki/Deploy-on-Amazon-EC2) has great reference for EC2 deployment.

Overall I am extremely happy with what I accomplished: I should be able to use this as a basis for all sorts of interesting art/technology projects; I further familiarized myself with docker, AWS and computing technology and I now ran make satisfying artwork with a few simple commands. The next steps will be automating the actual style transfer process and develop a simple pipline of some kind.