---
format: post
title: "The Game"
---
OpenEVA will be a resource management business sim in which you play as a blue collar extravehicular activity contractor working on Humanity's frontier in the year 2120. The main mechanic will center around building and maintaining your space ship, EVA suits, robots and other equipment required to fulfill various contracts in hazardous alien environments throughout the star system. The final goal is to save money for retirement, with an array of possible outcomes based on the players performance. The gameplay will not be super exiting, all gameplay systems will be something which can be implemented in a spreadsheet, but that can be something extremely useful when designing a complex, data-driven game like this. I intend for the game to be highly modular and extendable. All game materials, parts, equipment, contracts, events and more will be simple JSON definitions which will allow users to define their own content. 

 I want the incredible complexity of futuristic space ships and robots reflected in the game; Each piece of equipment will be constructed of a dizzyingly detailed array of parts and materials which will need to be maintained and replaced as they become worn or damaged. The player will use their equipment in order to contracts, which will be the players main income and driver of gameplay. Players will need to manage money, power, fuel, food and many other resources as they operate and grow their modest business. Purchasing, building, upgrading, or otherwise requiring equipment and components will serve the core source of game progress. I also have plans for a licensing and permit system which will provide additional progression and difficulty. Finally the player will be occasionally presented with events which will add complexity and flavor to gameplay.

##### Equipment

Every piece of the player's property in  OpenEVA will be represented as Equipment: Contracts will require equipment with specific capabilities; An appropriate EVA suit will need to be chosen for different conditions and situations; The player's ship will be an essential piece of Equipment that will have a variety of purposes and functions. The core gameplay mechanic of OpenEVA will be the construction and maintenance of your Equipment. The core progression mechanic will be acquiring and upgrading Equipment. Equipment will be central to OpenEVA and one of the systems that will make up the core of the development.

Each piece of Equipment will consist of a collection of Components which each have specific functions. Components may enable certain actions, generate power or resources, enable fabrication of Parts and Equipment, provide storage or fulfill some other purpose. Components may also have requirements for their operation or use. Components themselves will be collections Parts and Materials, which the player will need to maintain and replace as they become worn or damaged during use or as the result of some event. Parts are also collections Parts and Materials which will need to be maintained.

I am fairly confident this model will give me the sense of complexity an detail that I want to capture in OpenEVA. A nice hierarchical view of few layers of Part collections for each component should be sufficient to get my engineering neurons exited. This model will also be really easy to implement in code in a way that is highly flexible and defined through simple JSON.
