---
format: post
Title: Game State
---
Now that we have a high level model of the game mechanics, we can start designing the underlying systems which will enable them. The core element of OpenEVA's funtionality is the game state: All player Equipment, Resources and game progress will be stored as a simple database of flags and values; All Events and player interaction will involve modifying game state.in some way; And in-game interfaces will be reflections of the current state. Game progress, Contract and Event ocmpletion or availability, Event choice options, outcomes and more can be tracked by an array of simple flags. Resource pools can be stored as a series of key-value pairs. Player Equipmpnt inventory may be some straight forward relational struture of part templates and transient values. This solution should give OpenEVA a flexible and optomisable foundation upon which our mechanics, interfaces and content can be built.

##### Database

OpenEVA will need some sort of infrastructure to support game state data management. I envision a flexible database with a straighforward API, which can be extended as needed. This will store everything from Resource levels and game state flags to Equipment templates and Event pools. I have a fair amount of experience working with database technology, however I am not a data scientist. This is an area that will require considerable research and development. I hope to leverage existing free technology or software libraries to accomplish my goal.

We will need to develop a schema for OpenEVA's database structure. Due to our highly data and content driven goals, we will need a flexible and robust data model to support the game. This is an area which will need considerable research and development: I have a little experience working with <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Entity%E2%80%93attribute%E2%80%93value_model">Entity Attribute Value (EAV)</a> databases, which may suit OpenEVA's purposes. The EAV model, while potentially complex, is perfect for handling data that can be described as a set of entities or objects which have a arbitrary number of attributes or properties. However after research and experimentation we may find that a traditional relational model or some other data structure may be better suited to OpenEVA's needs. Proper research and schema implementation will be vital to OpenEVA's development.

Research will also be required to choose the database technology which will host our model. I hope to use a free software database solution or library to help with this. There are many technologies available and there is no need to reinvent the wheel. I have experience with <a href="https://mariadb.org/">MariaDB</a> in my professional career, however a more lightweight solution may be preferred.
