---
format: post
title: Philosophy of Design
---
I bill myself as a software developer and programmer, I enjoy electrical engineering and mechanics as hobbies, I probably should have gone for an engineering degree, and one day I may. However, my training is in game art and design, which are two areas that usually neglected in my projects in favor of putting code to silicon. I am generally bored by high level design and concept art; I can't count the friends, family and acquaintances, when they learn I develop software and games, who have divulged to me their fourteen billion dollar game ideas; Which generally tend to be no more than high level story, theme, or character concepts. Despite this, I have enough development experience to know the value of a strong, concise technical design spec and solid development plan. So, with OpenEVA I intent to take a different approach to game development than I usually follow. Keeping a regular devblog, documenting my designs, techniques and processes, tracking issues and feature development, and taking time to develop strong technical design specs before writing a single line of code. 

Whenever I talk about game design people generally start thinking about story ideas, style, theme, setting, art concepts and character designs. It is my belief however that these concepts have little value in core game design as I feel the designer should focus on the systems and interactions which will make up a game's mechanics, rather than the specifics of the content or narrattive they may wish to present. That isn't to say that story, theme, setting and character and artistic design have no place in game design; These can be very important concepts in inspiring and constraining the design of game features and mechanics. As well, a strong style, consistent theme, and impactful narrative are very important parts of a gaming or other interactive experience. However, the game designer must be able to fully describe and realise their game agnostic of the content. The designer should be able to write out, in easily parsed, concise English (or whatever their native language happens to be), a full description of the models, mechanics, interactions and features they intend to implement. Writing out a complete description of a feature is an invaluable part of the development process. In essence when a programmer writes code, they are writing a description of what they want the computer to do, using a representation of machine instructions translated into some human readable form. Writing out our design gives us allows to mentally implement the model in a natural form, free from the constraints and obfuscations of the syntax of whatever technology we end up using. It will allow us to explore interactions, detect logical inconsistencies, uncover problems in our systems, discover simplifications and optimizations, visualize user stories, and develop our model in a way that cannot be achieved without describing our idea in a textual stream. Having a strong specification and concise description of our features and models will give us a reference for the future and facilitate learning and collaboration. Developing a proper design is an immensely important step in software and games development. However, the designer must focus on the systems, models and features that they wish to implement and avoid losing themselves in the semantics of content or details of their specific implementations.
 
Over the course of OpenEVA's development, I plan to write up a detailed but concise technical design spec of each system, feature and mechanic before I attempt to implement the code. My designs will be largely agnostic of the game content, setting, theme or story. I want to build a system in which it is possible to portray a any number of themes, styles and settings simply by customising the game's content. Specific content, art and narrative design will likely not be started until the game systems and mechanics have been fully developed and implemented. If I draw on theme, setting  or content in my design it will only be to facilitate the development of the systems I will be implementing, and all content generated during the core development will be thrown away when we move from software development content creation. The systems that I have planned should be relatively simple, OpenEVA's complexity should come from the variety and depth of content rather than the mechanics themselves. Likewise none of the system's will be groundbreaking and something that could be implemented with any technology. In the coming weeks I will be focusing on developing a concise technical design spec which should allow anyone to implement the vision agnostic of content, technology or environment. 
